1

1. Beginner’s Guide to Poetry



2. Grades 9–12

Reading poetry offers you an effective reading comprehension practice, unlocking the skills you need to 
understand and analyze any text. Writing poetry gives you an outlet to practice creative expression and 
exploration. However, before you can enjoy these benefits of reading and writing poetry, you must first 
understand what poetry is.
What is Poetry? 
Poetry is a literary genre characterized by its attention to rhythm, sound, and language. What draws many 
toward writing poetry is its openness to experimentation. While some poetic forms have many rules and 
constraints, others have very few. When writing poetry, you decide which rules of grammar to follow and 
which ones not to follow. You decide where to break up your words and sentences using spaces or line 
breaks. You might choose unconventional spacing like in Danez Smith’s broke n rice. You can even 
decide whether you want to use real words or made-up ones!  In essence, poetry is a space of limitless 
creation. After all, the word “poetry” is derived from the Greek word poiesis, which means “making.” In 
this infinite-making space, however, you might find yourself wondering: How do I differentiate writing that 
is poetry from writing that is “not poetry”?
What Differentiates Poetry From “Not Poetry”? 
In elementary school, you likely practiced writing complete sentences, or stringing together words that 
express a complete idea, contain a subject and verb, start with a capital letter, and end with a 
punctuation mark. The dog likes food. There are many choices you might make when writing a sentence 
like that. Do you call the dog by its name? Clifford likes food. Do you conclude the sentence with a period 
or an exclamation point, communicating excitement or alarm about the dog liking food? Clifford likes 
food! Do you end the sentence with only one clause, or do you add more information? Clifford likes food, 
but the cat won’t let him eat! All writing, no matter the genre, is laden with choices. Through these 
choices, you decide how best to communicate your intended meaning.
Now, imagine that all of those rules for sentence-writing do not apply, and you have complete control 
over which rules or constraints to introduce or exclude. Not only will you consider the words themselves, 
what punctuation is most appropriate, and how much information to include in each sentence, you also 
have the space to think about which letters to capitalize, where you might want to add punctuation, 
where it makes sense to divide each letter and word and line, and more. You might come up with 
something like this:

3. the dog LIKES food

What differentiates this example from previous example sentences is that it is written in verse instead of 
prose. One indicator that can often differentiate poetry from “not poetry” is that most poetry is written in 
verse, rather than prose. In this table, we break down what those terms mean:

4. Verse



5. Prose

2
Prose is a form of writing intended to 
resemble how we naturally speak. Organized 
into sentences and paragraphs, prose writing 
tends to follow conventional grammar rules. 
•  Sentences: Sentences contain a
subject and a verb. They start with a 
capital letter and end with a 
punctuation mark. They express a 
complete idea.
•  Paragraphs: Paragraphs are groups of 
related sentences organized around a 
main idea or purpose.
Verse is a form of writing grouped into lines 
and stanzas. This writing can often include 
rhyme and meter.
•  Lines: Lines of poetry are words
grouped into a single lineation. They 
do not have to express a complete 
idea but may express many.
•  Stanza: Stanzas are groups of poetic
lines.
•  Rhyme: Rhyme refers to the
repetitions of similar sounds in the 
final syllable of words. Some poems 
use a rhyming pattern.
•  Meter: Meter refers to the rhythm of 
words, guided by which syllables we 
stress in spoken language. Some 
poems use a metrical structure.
Example:
Example:
Youth by Langston Hughes
We have tomorrow 
Bright before us 
Like a flame
Yesterday 
A night-gone thing, 
A sun-down name.
A dawn to-day 
Broad arch above the road we came.
We march!
An excerpt of Little Women by Louis May 
Alcott:
Jo was the first to wake in the gray dawn of 
Christmas morning. No stockings hung at the 
fireplace, and for a moment she felt as much 
disappointed as she did long ago, when her 
little sock fell down because it was crammed 
so full of goodies. Then she remembered her 
mother’s promise and, slipping her hand 
under her pillow, drew out a little crimson-
covered book.
3
Reading Poetry  
If you are new to poetry, it can be helpful to read a wide range of poems in order to familiarize yourself 
with what poetry can look and sound like. Just as there is no one right way to write a poem, there is also 
no one right way to read a poem. A poet might have a specific meaning in mind when writing a poem, but 
the meaning you take out of the poem is up to you! Still, the way you read poetry can influence the way 
you write poetry. Understanding how to make meaning of poetry helps you understand how to infuse 
meaning into your own poetry. Next, we will dive deeper into what making meaning out of poetry can look 
like.
What Do You Notice? 
Reading and making meaning out of poetry is an exercise in attentiveness. Every observation you make 
about a poem shapes the meaning you take from it. Making more observations can lead to deeper 
meaning-making. For guidance, consider the following poetic elements and download our “Reading 
Poetry Graphic Organizer.”

6. Word Choice

Poets often try to convey the most meaning they can using the fewest words possible. Therefore, they 
are very intentional with the words they choose, playing with words’ connotations, or the associations we 
have with words beyond their literal meaning. For example, the words “childish” and “childlike” have the 
same definition, as they are adjectives to describe someone who is like a child. However, the word 
“childish” holds a more negative connotation than “childlike,” as it can often be used to call someone silly 
or immature. Sometimes, poets will repeat words to emphasize their importance. As you read a poem, 
pay attention to each word.

7. As you read a poem, ask yourself:

•  What does each word mean? 
•  Which words in this poem carry strong connotations? What are they? 
•  Are any words repeated? Why might that be? 
•  What connections can I draw between these words?

8. Speaker

When you read a piece of fiction, the voice telling the story is called “the narrator”. When you read a 
poem, the voice of the poem is called “the speaker”. Sometimes, the speaker of a poem is the author of 
the poem, and, other times, it is not. The writer might also influence the speaker’s presence by writing 
from different points of view. Sometimes, a poem will use the first-person “I,” situating the poem around 
the speaker’s own perspective. Other times, a poem will use the second-perspective “you” or the third-
person perspective, which can distance the speaker from the subject matter.

9. As you read a poem, ask yourself:

•  Who is the speaker?
4
•  What do I know about the speaker from this poem? 
•  From which perspective is the poem written?

10. Punctuation

You likely make intentional choices about punctuation when writing prose, adding an exclamation point 
at the end of your sentence to indicate excitement or a question mark to indicate confusion. When 
writing poetry, there is even more to consider. Poets can decide whether or not to follow grammatical 
rules, such as forgoing the commas and periods that a sentence of prose might usually have. Often, 
poets play with grammatical rules. For example, they might decide to omit a comma where readers 
might expect it in order to indicate, perhaps, that the speaker of the poem cannot pause. A poem with no 
punctuation marks might give the poem a breathless quality. Meanwhile, a poem with more punctuation 
than expected might indicate that the speaker of the poem is struggling to get their words out.
As you read a poem, ask yourself:  
•  What punctuation is here?  
•  What punctuation did I expect here?  
•  How does the punctuation affect the meaning of the poem’s words?  
•  How does the punctuation affect the pace of the poem?

11. Sound

One of the most defining elements of poetry is its attention to sound. Rhyme is a common use of sound 
in poetry. A rhyme scheme, or an intentional pattern of rhyming words in a poem, can do many things: 
emphasize important words, create a pattern of sound that stays in the reader’s mind, and more. 
Sometimes, poets will break their rhyme scheme, using the subversion of expectations to further 
emphasize a particular word or idea. Poets also use assonance, or the repetition of similar vowel sounds, 
as well as consonance, or the repetition of similar consonant sounds. Alliteration is a type of consonance 
in which the repeated consonants are at the beginning of each word. These devices can add to the 
rhythm of a poem and have similar effects as rhyme. You might also find yourself paying attention to the 
effect of each single, articulated sound, or phoneme, in a word. For example, you might observe how the 
/l/ and /sh/ and /s/ sounds in the word “luscious” sound pleasingly rich, mimicking the word’s meaning 
and strengthening its effect.

12. As you read a poem, ask yourself:

•  What sounds do I hear? Are there rhyming words? Is there alliteration? 
•  How do the sounds in the poem relate to the words of the poem?

13. Meter

Meter is the rhythm of words, guided by which syllables we stress in spoken language. Consider the word 
“alone” for example. When you say the word aloud, you put the stress on the second syllable, articulating 
it with greater breath and effort than you do the first syllable. Sometimes, poets do not put much thought 
into where stress falls in each word. In those cases, poets may choose to write in free verse, a poetic
5
form that does not use a strict meter or rhyme scheme. Other times, poets pay great attention to where 
the stress falls in each word and intentionally create a pattern of stress in their lines. Take, for example, 
the following line:
Alone and lost upon this frigid sea,
The meter in this line switches back and forth between unstressed and stressed syllables. This is called 
“iambic meter.” There are many other patterns of stress that poets can use beyond iambic meter. For 
example, some poems are written in anapestic meter, following a repeated pattern of two unstressed 
syllables and a final stressed syllable, such as in the word “interrupt.”
Often, when following a strict meter, poets are not only intentional about the pattern of stressed and 
unstressed syllables in a line, they are also intentional about the number of syllables in a line. Take, for 
example, the following two lines:
Alone and lost upon this frigid sea, 
I call upon the hope inside of me.
Both of these lines have ten syllables in them, or five sets of an unstressed-stressed syllable grouping. 
This metrical structure is called “iambic pentameter.” There are many metrical structures a poet can 
choose to employ in a poem, each with different patterns of stressed and unstressed syllables and 
different numbers of syllables. For a deeper look into different metrical structures, check out this guide 
from the Purdue Online Writing Lab.
Sometimes, poets may break the metrical structures that they established in a poem. As a reader, pay 
attention to those instances. Breaking a pattern in a poem’s meter can emphasize certain words or lines. 
Now, we will revisit the previous example:
Alone and lost upon the frigid sea, 
I call upon the hope inside of me - please!
Here, we see that the second line includes an eleventh syllable, breaking the established pattern of ten-
syllable lines. One way to interpret this is that breaking the pattern draws attention to that eleventh 
syllable, placing emphasis on the word “please.” The added emphasis may communicate an extra level 
of desperation in the speaker’s plea. When analyzing meter in poetry, pay extra attention to any 
irregularities in a poem's metrical structure and think about what effect they have.

14. Shape

Sometimes, poets write lines and stanzas in a specific length, direction, and position in order to create an 
image on the page that relates to the subject matter of the poem. This is often called “concrete poetry” 
or “visual poetry.” For example, a poem that includes ocean imagery in its words might alternate between 
stanzas of short lines and stanzas of long lines, creating an image like the rise and fall of ocean waves.
6

15. As you read a poem, ask yourself:

•  Do I see an image in the shape of the poem’s words?  
•
If so, how does this image relate to the subject matter of the poem?

16. Lineation

Lines of poetry can contain as many or as few words as a poet chooses. They can contain one or several 
sentences, or they can be made up of sentence fragments, using enjambment as the sentence continues 
beyond the end of the line. Sometimes, poets even break a line in the middle of a word, creating a line 
with only a few letters. Where a poet chooses to break onto the next line is entirely up to them. Therefore, 
line breaks are often very intentional decisions that poetry readers should pay attention to. Take extra 
care to notice the word that a line ends on and the word that the next line begins with—line breaks are 
often intended to emphasize these words in particular. Often, line breaks mimic the natural pauses of 
speech or thought, but occasionally, poets use line breaks to purposefully disrupt those natural pauses.

17. As you read a poem, ask yourself:

•  Which words are emphasized by the poem’s line breaks? 
•  What meaning can I take from those words? 
•  What rhythm is created by the poem’s line breaks? 
•  Where is each line indented on the page?

18. Stanzas

Similar to how line breaks separate one line of poetry from the next, stanzas separate one group of lines 
from the next. A stanza can contain as many or as few lines as a poet chooses, and a poet can end a 
stanza wherever they see fit. Often, poets will write the same number of lines in each stanza or follow an 
alternating pattern of stanza length. Other times, poets choose to not follow any pattern of stanza length. 
Alternatively, they might follow a pattern initially and then break it to place emphasis on a particular area 
of their poem.

19. As you read a poem, ask yourself:

•  How many lines are in each stanza? 
• 
Is there a pattern of stanza length?  
•  Does each stanza end at the end of a sentence or thought? Or does the stanza break up the
sentence?
•  What do these choices draw my attention toward?
What Has Poetry Looked Like Over Time? 
The practice of poetry writing has no limits. This may leave you looking at a poem and wondering: Where 
do I even start? One entryway into reading poetry is in understanding what poetry has looked like 
throughout history. Throughout time, there have been several movements and schools of poetry writing 
that hold distinct approaches to writing it. Understanding the key elements of these approaches can
7
provide valuable context, allowing you to analyze a poem alongside other poems that employ similar 
elements.
Poetry Movements 
This table outlines several key poetry movements, their characteristics, and notable poets and poems 
from that movement. This is not an exhaustive list, as it focuses on poetry that has strongly influenced 
Western literature. Dates are estimated from the peak of each movement; some poets may fall outside 
of this range due to the lasting influence of many poetic styles.

20. Key Elements



21. Notable Poets

Examples
Ancient poetry was often 
shared orally, though 
there are poems recorded 
in writing from Ancient 
Greece and Rome. The 
subject matter of ancient 
poetry often included 
historical accounts, 
myths, and legends.
Taoist poetry is rooted in 
Taoism, a Chinese 
philosophical and 
religious movement that 
viewed poetry as a way to 
teach simplistic truths.
Ancient Poetry
5000–50 BC
Taoist Poetry
300 BC–1000 AD
Medieval Poetry
400 AD
●  Enheduanna
●  Homer
●  Virgil
●  Sappho
●  Catallus
●  The Epic of 
Gilgamesh
●  The Iliad
●  The Aeneid
●  Lao Tzu
●  The
●  Li Po
●  Tu Fu

22. Solitude of Night

●  Pounding

23. the Clothes

●  Beowulf
●  The

24. Parliament of Fowls

Medieval poetry, often 
containing themes of war 
and religion, witnessed 
the emergence of rhyming 
couplets and ballads. 
During this time, poetry 
was seen as part of
●  Chaucer
●  Marie de 
France
●  Dante
Alighieri
The Renaissance
1400s–1600s
Romanticism
1790–1850s
proper education for 
nobility.
During the Renaissance, 
poetic themes included 
love, nature, and 
mythology. It was at this 
time that the sonnet form 
arose, and some poets 
sought to revive ancient 
Greek and Roman styles 
like the epic.
Romanticism saw the rise 
of lyric poetry in first 
person, containing 
subjective themes of self-
expression, everyday life, 
and how the speaker 
experiences nature and 
emotion.
Transcendentalism
1820s–1840s
A descendant of 
Romanticism, 
Transcendentalism was 
characterized by themes 
of self-realization and 
philosophical exploration 
of humanity in time.
●  Ralph Waldo 
Emerson
●  Henry David 
Thoreau
●  Louisa May 
Alcott
8
●  William
●  At a
Shakespear
e
●  John Milton
●  George 
Herbert

25. Solemn Music

●  The Altar
●  The

26. Phoenix and the Turtle

●  William
●  A
Wordsworth

27. Complaint

●  Samuel
Taylor 
Coleridge
●  John Keats
●  Rainer Maria
Rilke
●  Constancy 
to an Ideal 
Object
●  Bright star, 
would I 
were 
stedfast as 
thou art
●  Transfigura

28. tion

●  Fate
●

29. I Am a Parcel of Vain Strivings Tied

Modernism
1890s–1950s
Imagism
1910s–1930s
Dadaism
1910s–1920s
The Harlem 
Renaissance
1920s–1930s
9
Modernism moved away 
from the personal and 
toward the intellectual, 
featuring a rejection of 
literary tradition and a 
reevaluation of aesthetics.
●  W.H. Auden
●  William
Butler Yeats
●  Katherine 
Mansfield
●  Musée des 
Beaux Arts
●  Adam’s 
Curse
●  Voices of 
the Air
A subgenre of Modernism, 
Imagism is a reaction to 
Romanticism that 
emphasized accurate 
observations and 
simplicity.
●  Ezra Pound
●  Aunt Helen
●  Amy Lowell
●  T.S. Eliot
●  H.D. (Hilda 
Doolittle)
●  Eurydice
●  Autumn
●  Peace on 
Earth
Dadaism, a reaction to the 
lack of reason during 
wartime, featured 
spontaneous and 
irrational themes.
Rooted in New York’s 
African-American 
community, poetry of the 
Harlem Renaissance 
explored themes of 
cultural identity and 
expression.
●  Hugo Ball
●  Karawane
●  Tristan 
Tzara
●  Kurt
Schwitters
●  Langston 
Hughes
●  Claude 
McKay
●  James 
Weldon 
Johnson
●  Gwendolyn 
B. Bennett
●  Federico 
García 
Lorca
●  Charles
Baudelaire
●  Speaking 
Alone
●  Ursonate
●  Harlem
●

30. If We Must Die

●  A Poet to 
His Baby 
Son
●  Two

31. Evening Moons

●  Destruction
Surrealism
1920s–1950s
Originating in Paris, 
Surrealism focused on 
truth revealed through
10
unconscious thought and 
dreams.
●  Pablo
Neruda
●  Finale
Beat Poetry
1940s–1960s
The Beat Movement 
called for a cultural 
rejection of American 
institutions. Poetry during 
this time was concerned 
with authenticity, the 
expansion of 
consciousness, and 
political and poetic 
experimentation.
●  Allen
Ginsburg
●  Jack
Kerouac
●  Michael 
McClure
●  Diane Di 
Prima
Confessional Poetry
1950s–1960s
Confessional poetry is 
characterized by self-
revelation and self-
disclosure, as the poet 
and speaker are the same.
●  Robert 
Lowell
●  Sylvia Plath
●  Anne Sexton
Black Arts Movement
1960s–1970s
The Black Arts movement 
was a poetic partner to 
the political Black Power 
movement. This poetry 
expressed Black joy and 
culture.
●  Amiri
Baraka
●  Haki
Madhubuti
●  Sonia
Sanchez
●  Audre Lorde
●  Nikki
Giovanni
●  Howl*
●  The

32. bottoms of my shoes

●  Buddhist 
New Year 
Song
●  Epilogue
●  Morning 
Song
●  The

33. Ambition Bird

●  An Agony. 
As Now.
●  For the

34. Considerati on of Poets

●  Hanging 
Fire
Contemporary Poetry
(now)
Contemporary poetry has 
great stylistic and 
thematic diversity, with an 
emphasis on breaking
●  Maya
Angelou
●  Carolyn 
Forché
●  Caged Bird
●  Skin

35. Canoes

11
traditional rules of form 
and meter.
●  Mary Oliver
●  Breakage
●  Ocean 
Vuong
●  Ada Limón
●  Joy Harjo
●  Torso of Air
●  The Leash
●  Perhaps the 
World Ends 
Here
*Note: Poetry provides space for poets to explore difficult topics. Please ensure poem content is 
appropriate for your students before incorporating poems into instruction.
Writing Poetry 
Now that you have practiced making meaning out of poetry, we can turn our focus toward how to make 
meaning into poetry.
Where To Start 
A poem can emerge from any number of thoughts and ideas. Perhaps you want to unpack the emotions 
you have about a particular memory. Or maybe you find that something you observed in nature, like the 
falling of leaves, is the perfect analogy for a feeling you have and want to explore through metaphor. 
Once you have found the roots of a poem, it may blossom in many directions. Downloading our “Poetry 
Brainstorming Worksheet” and asking yourself the following questions can help with that process.

36. Asking Questions



37. Content

•  What is the poem about? What will the poem say? How clearly do I want the poem to say it?  
•  Does the poem come to any conclusions or answer any questions?

38. Structure

•  Would it make sense for the poem to follow a strict structure (e.g., sonnets, haikus)? How closely
do I want the poem to follow this structure?
•  Would it make sense for the poem to rhyme? If so, what rhyming pattern would work best? 
•  Would it make sense for the poem to have a metrical structure? If so, which structure would work

39. best? Language and Voice

•  Who is speaking in the poem? Who are they speaking to? What tone would they take? 
•  Would it make sense for the poem to include a lot of figurative language or literary devices? If so,
what kinds? Would it make sense for the poem to be very literal?

40. Where to Go

12
Once you have a general idea of what you want to write about and how you want to write it, you are ready 
to start writing!

41. Let Your Ideas Flow

As you write, it is important to remember that you can choose the rules of your poem. Poetry is a space 
of exploration. You do not need to start by writing the first line—you could start anywhere in the poem 
and build out from there! You do not need to fully understand your own words at first—lean into ideas you 
are unsure of, associations you have that do not straightforwardly connect, and emotions you do not 
quite have the words for.  
When you begin to write, you might have a strong idea of what you want your poem to be. Let that initial 
conception of your poem guide you as you begin, but also remain open to new ideas as your poem 
evolves. To that point, do not expect to finish the poem in one sitting. Writing a poem can take as many 
minutes, days, months, or years as it needs. If the words are not coming to you when you sit down to 
write, that is okay. Sometimes, you have to wait for inspiration to come to you. Other times, you have to 
write many words that do not quite feel like the right ones in order to get to what feels right.
Revision 
A poem may not take the shape you envisioned in the first draft. Revision is an important part of all 
writing. To revise a poem, you can follow a process of personal review, look to others for feedback, or 
both.

42. Personal Review

After you have written a first draft, there may be certain areas of your poem that you are not content with. 
Perhaps you are unsure whether a certain word or line break accurately reflects the meaning you intend 
to convey. Perhaps you have read your work aloud and would like to reconsider the meter, rhyme pattern, 
or alliteration in your poem. When reviewing your poem with a critical eye, trust your gut and change what 
feels right. You might identify an area that you are unsure of and write several versions of it to see which 
you prefer. You can always go back to an earlier draft if you do not like the new directions you explored. 
Identifying the areas you are unsure of and playing around with them is the only way to find the poem 
that aligns with your vision.
Once you have worked on the issues that immediately jump out to you, you may want to take a deeper 
dive. No matter how intentional you are with each stanza, line, word, and comma of your piece, there may 
be parts of your poem that you have overlooked. You will want to watch out for unintentionally confusing 
or unclear areas of your poem. To clear up any confusion you did not intend to create, consider the 
following areas:

43. Mixed Metaphors

A metaphor draws a comparison between two objects or concepts without using “like” or “as.” A mixed 
metaphor occurs when two or more metaphors are combined in an illogical way. Take the sentence “She 
wears an open book on her sleeve” as an example. This sentence mixes two common metaphors together:
13
Comparing someone to an open book means that they are not a secretive person. Meanwhile, saying that 
someone wears their heart on their sleeve compares a person’s emotional vulnerability to their clothing, 
emphasizing that both things are plainly visible. While these metaphors have similar meanings, when you 
put them together, the meaning becomes difficult to interpret. That does not mean you should avoid mixing 
metaphors. When used intentionally, mixed metaphors can create surprising and complex comparisons. 
However, sometimes you might mix your metaphors by mistake, especially when using common figures 
of speech. You might be so familiar with  calling someone  an “open book” that you do not even realize 
when you have brought it into another metaphor that does not complement it.
As you revise your poem, take note of each metaphor and figure of speech to ensure that you have used 
each one intentionally.

44. Abstractions

An abstraction refers to a concept or thought that is not associated with a concrete image, sound, smell, 
taste, or feeling. “Love,” “nostalgia,” “hope,” and more are all abstractions of complex, intangible 
concepts. Sometimes, poets gravitate toward abstractions, leaning away from specific senses or 
meanings and opening their poetry up to wider ranges of interpretation. Other times, poets may avoid 
abstraction, finding that descriptions of concrete senses capture abstract ideas more meaningfully than 
the conceptual words associated with them. For example, instead of using abstractions like “cozy” or 
“safety,” Ada Limón describes, “Your shoes are piled up with mine, and the heat / comes on, makes a 
simple noise, a dog-yawn” in her poem “During the Impossible Age of Everyone.” The warmth, the “yawn” 
of the heater, and the image of the shoes entangled together evoke the coziness and safety of home 
without saying any of those words explicitly. Instead, Limón opts to immerse readers in the sensations of 
these abstractions.
As you revise your poem, take note of each abstract word and assess how it is serving the piece. Does 
the word hold strong on its own? Or would it benefit from more tangible imagery?

45. Getting Feedback

It is always up to you whether or not you would like to share your poetry with others. If you are interested 
in sharing it, you might benefit from receiving feedback from people you trust to be thoughtful readers. 
After you have completed your personal review process, an outside pair of eyes can help you see how 
others interpret your poetry.
When asking for feedback, it is important to remember that you can set parameters for what kind of 
feedback you are looking to receive. You might be interested in hearing general feedback about your 
piece, but you can also ask for feedback in specific areas (i.e. word choice, line breaks, punctuation, 
etc.). In those areas, you can let others know whether you are interested in hearing ideas about how to 
revise. Here are some examples of questions you might pose when asking for feedback:
•  What did you think this poem/stanza/line was about?  
•  What image or feeling did these words bring to mind?  
•  What parts of the poem were your favorite? What is working for you here?
14
•  What parts of the poem did you find confusing? Do you have suggestions for how I might revise?
For further guidance, download our “Poetry Peer Feedback Form.”
Feedback can be a useful tool to guide your revision process, and inviting other trusted writers into your 
writing process can make you a stronger writer. Still, not everyone will understand your poetry or be able 
to offer valuable feedback. At the end of the day, your poetry is yours. Don’t forget to listen to your own 
artistic voice. If you are happy with how your poem has turned out, then that is the most important thing!
15

46. Poetry Glossary

Poetic Devices 
Alliteration is the repetition of sounds at the start of multiple successive words.
Example: “The big brown bear finds berries.”
An allusion is an indirect reference to an object, concept, or person outside of the text.
Example: “Chocolate is my kryptonite” alludes to Superman.
An analogy draws a comparison between two things. 
Example: “The store was a zoo during the sale!”
A metaphor draws a comparison between two objects or concepts without using “like” or “as,” and 
an extended metaphor continues this comparison throughout an entire poem or text.;
Example: Shakespeare’s “Sonnet 18” features a metaphor with the famous line, “Shall I 
compare thee to a summer’s day?”
A simile draws a comparison between two objects or concepts using “like” or “as.”
Example: “Her voice is as sweet as honey.”
An anaphora is the repetition of a word or phrase at the beginning of a series of successive lines, 
sentences, or clauses.
Example: Charles Dickens begins A Tale of Two Cities with, “It was the best of times, it was the worst 
of times…”
An aphorism, also known as an “adage” or “maxim,” is a short, often humorous saying that observes a 
general moral truth.
Example: “The pen is mightier than the sword.”
Apostrophe in poetry occurs when the speaker of the poem addresses an absent person, an inanimate 
object, or a concept.
Example: “Twinkle, twinkle little star, how I wonder what you are.”
Assonance occurs when two or more words in a line contain similar vowel sounds.
Example: “eyes on the prize” or “surf and turf”
Chiasmus is a figure of speech featuring the reversal of grammar structures in successive phrases; the 
order of concepts is inverted in the second iteration.
Example: “She has all my love; my heart belongs to her.”
Antimetabole is related to chiasmus, and some consider it to be a type of chiasmus. This device 
features an exact inversion of concepts.
16
Example: “Live simply so that others may simply live.”
Consonance refers to the repetition of a given consonant sound within a line of text.
Example: “odds and ends” or “front and center”
Enjambment occurs when a sentence continues past one line of a poem into the next.
Example: In Romeo and Juliet, Shakespeare writes, “When he shall die / take him and cut him out in 
little stars.” Note: A forward slash when writing about poetry refers to a line break.
Hyperbole uses deliberate exaggeration to emphasize a point and evoke an emotional response in the 
reader.
Example: They love their cat to the moon and back.
Imagery refers to descriptive elements of a poem that engage a reader’s senses through sights, sounds, 
feelings, and smells.
Example: In the poem “I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud,” William Wordsworth uses visual imagery to 
reflect an internal, emotional journey.
Juxtaposition is a literary device that places two contrasting things next to each other to emphasize their 
differences and establish tone.
Example: In Robert Frost’s “The Road Not Taken,” juxtaposition is observed through the contrast of 
the well-worn and less traveled paths.
Meter is the rhythm of words, guided by which syllables we stress in spoken language. Some poems use 
a metrical structure in which a given meter is applied to most or all of the poem. Groups of syllables 
(either within a word or across multiple words) that follow a specific pattern of stress are called feet. 
Next, we will take a look at a few different metrical feet:
An anapest is a three-syllable foot in which two unstressed syllables are followed by a stressed 
syllable.
Example: The words “understand” and “interrupt” are anapests.
A dactyl is a three-syllable foot in which a stressed syllable is followed by two unstressed syllables 
Example: The words “poetry” and “mockingbird” are dactyls. This metrical pattern is often used 
in epic poetry such as the Odyssey.
An iamb is a two-syllable foot in which an unstressed syllable is followed by a stressed syllable.
Example: The words “beneath” and “acquire” are iambs. A line of poetry with five iambs is 
called iambic pentameter, which is a common meter for sonnets as well as many of 
Shakespeare’s plays.
A spondee is a two-syllable foot in which both syllables are stressed. 
Example: The words “bookmark” and “handshake” are spondaic.
A trochee is a two-syllable foot in which a stressed syllable is followed by an unstressed syllable.
17
Example: The words “inward” and “garden” are trochaic.
Metonymy refers to substituting one word for another in poetry.
Example: Someone might address “the crown” when they are actually referring to the king or queen.
Onomatopoeia is a word that mimics a sound we hear, often used to create imagery in poetry.
Example: “Splash,” “clang,” “buzz,” and “whir” are all instances of onomatopoeia.
A paradox is a contradictory statement that, upon reflection, illuminates a truth often intended to 
challenge a reader’s perspective on a concept. 
Example: “Youth is wasted on the young.”
Personification occurs when a writer grants human characteristics to an animal, inanimate object, or 
abstract idea.
Example: The Grim Reaper is a personification of death. Many fables personify animals to tell a story 
with a moral message.
Repetition occurs when a writer uses a word, phrase, image, or structure more than once within a poem 
or text.
Example: Alliteration is one type of repetition, as is the refrain of a poem or song.
Words that rhyme have a pattern of similar sounds, like “cricket” and “ticket.” In poetry, a rhyme scheme 
refers to the pattern of rhyme in a poem, like ABAB (alternate rhyme). When rhyme patterns are 
described by letters such as ABAB CDCD or ABAB BCBC, each letter refers to a line of the poem. Lines 
that rhyme are given the same letter. So, in a quatrain with alternate rhyme (ABAB), lines 1 and 3 would 
have rhyming end sounds, and lines 2 and 4 would have different rhyming end sounds.
Example: “Little Miss Muffet” illustrates a rhyme scheme (AABCCB) when you look at the last 
sounds of each line:
Little Miss Muffet 
Sat on a tuffet, 
Eating her curds and whey; 
Along came a spider, 
Who sat down beside her, 
And frightened Miss Muffet away.
End rhyme involves a rhyme between the final words in separate lines of poetry.
Example: Robert Frost uses end rhyme in his poem, “Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening.” 
End rhymes are often used in children’s poetry today but are less common among 
contemporary poets.
Internal rhyme involves a rhyme between a word in the middle of a line and another at the end of 
the same line or within the next line.
Example: Edgar Allen Poe uses internal rhyme in “The Raven,” which reads, “Once upon a 
midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary.”
18
Slant rhyme uses consonance or assonance at the end of words to make two or more lines sound 
similar but not identical.
Example: In “Hope is the thing with feathers,” Emily Dickinson rhymes “soul” with “all” in the 
first stanza.
A speaker in poetry is equivalent to a narrator in prose. The speaker may be the author, an imagined 
person, an animal, or an inanimate object from whom the point of view originates.
Example: In Langston Hughes’ “Mother to Son,” the speaker of the poem is a woman addressing her 
child.
Symbolism is a literary device in which one object or character represents another, more abstract idea. 
This device is often used to help readers follow the development of important themes in the poem or 
text.
Example: A dove is often a symbol for peace.
A stanza consists of a series of lines arranged together in a poem, sometimes containing a repeating 
pattern of rhythm and rhyme. Common stanza types include couplets (two lines), tercets (three lines), 
quatrains, (four lines), sestets (six lines), and octets (eight lines).
Example: Kiki Petrosino writes her poem, “Whole 30,” in six stanzas. The first five are tercets, with a 
final quatrain.
Synecdoche is a figure of speech in which a part of something is used to represent its whole. For a 
similar literary device, see “metonymy,” or check out this resource to read about the differences between 
the two terms.
Example: The part “threads” may be used to refer to the whole “clothing.”
A zeugma is a figure of speech in which one word, usually a verb or an adjective, is applied to two other 
words in a sentence. This “governing” word means something different when applied to each of the 
words that follow it, but the sentence as a whole makes grammatical and logical sense.
Example: “She carried an old backpack and the responsibility for the apocalypse.” Here, the 
governing word “carried” has a different meaning when paired with “backpack” and “responsibility,” 
but each object still makes grammatical sense with the governing word.

47. Poetic Forms Acrostic Poetry

An acrostic poem spells out a word or phrase when you read the first letter of each line. Lewis Carroll’s 
“A Boat Beneath a Sunny Sky” is a great example of an acrostic poem. When read vertically, the first 
letters of the first five lines of the poem reveal the name of Carroll’s inspiration for Alice in Wonderland.

48. Ars Poetica

19
“Ars Poetica” refers to a poem about the “art of poetry” through a reflection on poetic craft and 
technique. This form originates from Horace’s “Ars Poetica” addressed to beginning poets. For a more 
contemporary example, take a look at “Introduction to Poetry” by Billy Collins.

49. Blackout Poetry

When writing blackout poetry (also known as “redacted poetry” or “erasure poetry”), poets carefully 
select words and phrases from existing texts before blacking out the rest of the text. Materials may 
include novels, articles, magazines, or newspapers. Check out this poem or these examples to explore 
the different forms blackout poetry can take.

50. Concrete Poetry

Also called “visual poetry,” a concrete poem takes the shape of an image, often one related to the poem’s 
content. For example, the lines of a poem about a forest may be arranged to form a tree when you look 
at the page. This shape can be obvious, like in these poems, or more subtle, like in this example.

51. Duplex

Created by Jericho Brown and illustrated in his poem, “Duplex,” this poetic form involves a series of 
couplets (two-line stanzas) scaffolded with a repetitive structure. The first line of each couplet mirrors 
the last line of the couplet before it, and the second line of each couplet introduces a new idea that is 
repeated in the first line of the following couplet.

52. Ekphrastic Poetry

Ekphrastic poems are inspired by artwork and often describe the scene, setting, and/or perspective of a 
painting or sculpture. William Carlos Williams wrote the ekphrastic poem “Landscape with the Fall of 
Icarus,” inspired by Pieter Bruegel’s oil painting of the same name.

53. Free Verse

Free verse poetry does not use a strict meter or rhyme scheme; instead, it often mimics the natural flow 
of speech. “[i carry your heart with me (i carry it in]” is a free verse poem by E. E. Cummings, who was 
known to test the boundaries of widely recognized poetry during the time in which he wrote.

54. Golden Shovel

A form created by Terrance Hayes, golden shovel poems borrow a line or more from an existing poem 
and use each word of that line(s) as the final word in each line of their own new poem. This allows poets 
to pay tribute to other works they admire, as Hayes did with his poem, “The Golden Shovel”, which uses 
the entirety of  Gwendolyn Brooks’s “We Real Cool” to supply the final word of each of its lines.

55. Haiku

20
Haikus are a Japanese form of short poetry containing three lines with five syllables in the first line, 
seven syllables in the second line, and five syllables in the third line. These poems often draw themes 
from nature, as can be observed in the work of Bashō.

56. Prose Poetry

Prose poetry combines the form of prose with the style and figurative language of poetry. Amy Lowell’s 
“Bath” is an example of a prose poem.

57. Persona Poetry

In persona poetry, the speaker is a dramatic character who is not the poet. In “Abt Vogler,” Robert 
Browning uses the persona of the famous organist Vogler to deliver a reflective poem on the experiences 
of a musician addressing the audience.

58. Sestina

A sestina is a French form of poetry that has no rhyme scheme but follows a pattern for word repetition 
across its six stanzas. Check out the Academy of American Poet’s definition of a sestina for more 
details and examples.

59. Sonnet

Originally a form intended to lament unrequited love, a sonnet is a poem of fourteen lines that often uses 
a rhyme scheme and pentameter. Sonnets often introduce a new idea or shift in perspective in the last 
few lines, known as a “volta.” Molly Peacok’s “Altruism” is an example of an English sonnet. Check out 
this resource to learn more about the many types of sonnets.

60. Terza Rima

Originating from Dante Alighieri’s The Divine Comedy, this Italian poetic form consists of tercets, or 
groupings of three lines, that are interwoven with the rhyming pattern ABA, BCB, DED, and so on. 
Jacqueline Osherow’s “Autumn Psalm” is an example of a terza rima poem that also uses slant rhyme.

61. Terzanelle

A terzanelle combines the terza rima and villanelle forms of poetry to create a poem with nineteen lines. 
Poets Collective goes into greater depth about the rhyme scheme here.

62. Villanelle

Villanelles, such as Elizabeth Bishop’s “One Art,” include five stanzas with three lines each followed by a 
quatrain with an ABAA rhyming pattern.